OBJECTIVE : To determine the extent to which computerised decision support can improve concordance of multidisciplinary teams with therapeutic decisions recommended by guidelines. DESIGN : Multicentre cluster randomised trial. PARTICIPANTS : Multidisciplinary cardiac rehabilitation teams in Dutch centres and their cardiac rehabilitation patients. INTERVENTIONS : Teams received an electronic patient record system with or without additional guideline based decision support. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES : Concordance with guideline recommendations assessed for two standard rehabilitation treatments-exercise and education therapy-and for two new but evidence based rehabilitation treatments-relaxation and lifestyle change therapy ; generalised estimating equations were used to account for intra-cluster correlation and were adjusted for patient 's age , sex , and indication for cardiac rehabilitation and for type and volume of centre. RESULTS : Data from 21 centres , including 2787 patients , were analysed. Computerised decision support increased concordance with guideline recommended therapeutic decisions for exercise therapy by 7.9 % ( control 84.7 % ; adjusted difference 3.5 % , 95 % confidence 0.1 % to 5.2 % ) , for education therapy by 25.7 % ( control 63.9 % ; adjusted difference 23.7 % , 15.5 % to 29.4 % ) , and for relaxation therapy by 25.5 % ( control 34.1 % ; adjusted difference 41.6 % , 25.2 % to 51.3 % ) . The concordance for lifestyle change therapy increased by 3.2 % ( control 54.1 % ; adjusted difference 7.1 % , -2.9 % to 18.3 % ) . Computerised decision support reduced cases of both overtreatment and undertreatment. CONCLUSIONS : In a multidisciplinary team motivated to adopt a computerised decision support aid that assists in formulating guideline based care plans , computerised decision support can be effective in improving the team 's concordance with guidelines. Therefore , computerised decision support may also be considered to improve implementation of guidelines in such settings. TRIAL REGISTRATION : Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN36656997 .