Randomised controlled trial to compare surgical stabilisation of the lumbar spine with an intensive rehabilitation programme for patients with chronic low back pain : the MRC spine stabilisation trial . To assess the clinical effectiveness of surgical stabilisation ( spinal fusion ) compared with intensive rehabilitation for patients with chronic low back pain . Multicentre randomised controlled trial . 15 secondary care orthopaedic and rehabilitation centres across the United Kingdom . 349 participants aged 18 - 55 with chronic low back pain of at least 1 year 's duration who were considered candidates for spinal fusion . Lumbar spine fusion or an intensive rehabilitation programme based on principles of cognitive behaviour therapy . The primary outcomes were the Oswestry disability index and the shuttle walking test measured at baseline and 2 years after randomisation . The SF-36 instrument was used as a secondary outcome measure . 176 participants were assigned to surgery and 173 to rehabilitation . 284 ( 81 % ) provided follow - up data at 24 months . The mean Oswestry disability index changed favourably from 46.5 ( SD 14.6 ) to 34.0 ( SD 21.1 ) in the surgery group and from 44.8 ( SD14.8 ) to 36.1 ( SD 20.6 ) in the rehabilitation group . The estimated mean difference between the groups was - 4.1 ( 95 % confidence interval - 8.1 to - 0.1 , P = 0.045 ) in favour of surgery . No significant differences between the treatment groups were observed in the shuttle walking test or any of the other outcome measures . Both groups reported reductions in disability during 2 years of follow - up , possibly unrelated to the interventions . The statistical difference between treatment groups in 1 of the 2 primary outcome measures was marginal and only just reached the predefined minimal clinical difference , and the potential risk and additional cost of surgery also need to be considered . No clear evidence emerged that primary spinal fusion surgery was any more beneficial than intensive rehabilitation .