Response to antibiotics of women with symptoms of urinary tract infection but negative dipstick urine test results : double blind randomised controlled trial . To assess the effectiveness of antibiotic treatment of women with symptoms of urinary tract infection but negative urine dipstick testing . Prospective , double blind , randomised , placebo controlled trial . Primary care , among a randomly selected group of general practitioners in Christchurch , New Zealand . 59 women aged 16-50 years presenting with a history of dysuria and frequency in whom a dipstick test of midstream urine was negative for both nitrites and leucocytes . Participants with complicated urinary tract infection were excluded . Trimethoprim 300 mg daily for 3 days or placebo . Self reported diary of symptoms for 7 days , recording the presence or absence of individual symptoms each day , followed by a structured telephone questionnaire after 7 days . The main clinical outcome was resolution of dysuria at 3 and 7 days and median time to resolution . Secondary outcomes were resolution of other symptoms . The median time for resolution of dysuria was 3 days for trimethoprim compared with 5 days for placebo ( P = 0.002 ) . At day 3 , 5 ( 24 % ) of patients in the treatment group had ongoing dysuria compared with 20 ( 74 % ) in the placebo group ( P = 0.005 ) . This difference persisted until day 7 : 2 patients ( 10 % ) in the treatment group v 11 ( 41 % ) in the placebo group ; P = 0.02 ) . The number needed to treat was 4 . The median duration of constitutional symptoms ( feverishness , shivers ) was reduced by 4 days . Although a negative dipstick test for leucocytes and nitrites accurately predicted absence of infection when standard microbiological definitions were used ( negative predictive value 92 % ) , it did not predict response to antibiotic treatment . 3 days ' treatment with trimethoprim significantly reduced dysuria in women whose urine dipstick test was negative . These results support the practice of empirical antibiotic use guided by symptoms . Balancing the competing interests of symptom relief and the minimisation of antibiotic use remains a dilemma - further research is needed to determine clinical predictors of response to antibiotics .