Household based treatment of drinking water with flocculant -disinfectan for preventing diarrhoea in areas with turbid source water in rural western Kenya : cluster randomised controlled trial . To compare the effect on prevalence of diarrhoea and mortality of household based treatment of drinking water with flocculant -disinfectant , sodium hypochlorite , and standard practices in areas with turbid water source in Africa . Cluster randomised controlled trial over 20 weeks . Family compounds , each containing several houses , in rural western Kenya . 6650 people in 605 family compounds . Water treatment : flocculant -disinfectant , sodium hypochlorite , and usual practice ( control ) . Prevalence of diarrhoea and all cause mortality . Escherichia coli concentration , free residual chlorine concentration , and turbidity in household drinking water as surrogates for effectiveness of water treatment . In children < 2 years old , compared with those in the control compounds , the absolute difference in prevalence of diarrhoea was - 25 % in the flocculant -disinfectant arm ( 95 % confidence interval - 40 to - 5) and - 17 % in the sodium hypochlorite arm ( - 34 to 4 ) . In all age groups compared with control , the absolute difference in prevalence was - 19 % in the flocculant -disinfectant arm ( - 34 to -2) and - 26 % in the sodium hypochlorite arm ( -39 to - 9 ) . There were significantly fewer deaths in the intervention compounds than in the control compounds ( relative risk of death 0.58 , P = 0.036 ) . 14 per cent of water samples from control compounds had E coli concentrations < 1 CFU / 100 ml compared with 82 % in flocculant -disinfectant and 78 % in sodium hypochlorite compounds . The mean turbidity of drinking water was 8 nephelometric turbidity units ( NTU ) in flocculant -disinfectant households , compared with 55 NTU in the 2 other compounds ( P < 0.001 ) . In areas of turbid water , flocculant -disinfectant was associated with a significant reduction in diarrhoea among children < 2 years . This health benefit , combined with a significant reduction in turbidity , suggests that the flocculant -disinfectant is well suited to areas with highly contaminated and turbid water .