Targets and self monitoring in hypertension : randomised controlled trial and cost effectiveness analysis . To assess whether blood pressure control in primary care could be improved with the use of patient held targets and self monitoring in a practice setting , and to assess the impact of these on health behaviours , anxiety , prescribed antihypertensive drugs , patients ' preferences , and costs . Randomised controlled trial . 8 general practices in south Birmingham . 441 people receiving treatment in primary care for hypertension but not controlled below the target of < 140 / 85 mm Hg . Patients in the intervention group received treatment targets along with facilities to measure their own blood pressure at their general practice ; they were also asked to visit their general practitioner or practice nurse if their blood pressure was repeatedly above the target level . Patients in the control group received usual care ( blood pressure monitoring by their practice ) . Primary outcome : change in systolic blood pressure at 6 months and 1 year in both intervention and control groups . Secondary outcomes : change in health behaviours , anxiety , prescribed antihypertensive drugs , patients ' preferences of method of blood pressure monitoring , and costs . 400 ( 91 % ) patients attended follow up at 1 year . Systolic blood pressure in the intervention group had significantly reduced after 6 months ( mean difference 4.3 mm Hg ( 95 % confidence interval 0.8 mm Hg to 7.9 mm Hg) ) but not after 1 year ( mean difference 2.7 mm Hg ( - 1.2 mm Hg to 6.6 mm Hg) ) . No overall difference was found in diastolic blood pressure , anxiety , health behaviours , or number of prescribed drugs . Patients who self monitored lost more weight than controls ( as evidenced by a drop in body mass index ) , rated self monitoring above monitoring by a doctor or nurse , and consulted less often . Overall , self monitoring did not cost significantly more than usual care ( 251 pounds sterling ( 437 dollars ; 364 euros ) ( 95 % confidence interval 233 pounds sterling to 275 pounds sterling ) versus 240 pounds sterling ( 217 pounds sterling to 263 pounds sterling ) . Practice based self monitoring resulted in small but significant improvements of blood pressure at 6 months , which were not sustained after a year . Self monitoring was well received by patients , anxiety did not increase , and there was no appreciable additional cost . Practice based self monitoring is feasible and results in blood pressure control that is similar to that in usual care .