Effect of a multifaceted intervention on number of antimicrobial prescriptions for suspected urinary tract infections in residents of nursing homes : cluster randomised controlled trial . To assess whether a multifaceted intervention can reduce the number of prescriptions for antimicrobials for suspected urinary tract infections in residents of nursing homes . Cluster randomised controlled trial . 24 nursing homes in Ontario , Canada , and Idaho , United States . 12 nursing homes allocated to a multifaceted intervention and 12 allocated to usual care . Outcomes were measured in 4217 residents . Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for urinary tract infections implemented at the nursing home level using a multifaceted approach - - small group interactive sessions for nurses , videotapes , written material , outreach visits , and 1 on 1 interviews with physicians . Number of antimicrobials prescribed for suspected urinary tract infections , total use of antimicrobials , admissions to hospital , and deaths . Fewer courses of antimicrobials for suspected urinary tract infections per 1000 resident days were prescribed in the intervention nursing homes than in the usual care homes ( 1.17 v 1.59 courses ; weighted mean difference - 0.49 , 95 % confidence intervals - 0.93 to - 0.06 ) . Antimicrobials for suspected urinary tract infection represented 28.4 % of all courses of drugs prescribed in the intervention nursing homes compared with 38.6 % prescribed in the usual care homes ( weighted mean difference - 9.6 % , - 16.9 % to - 2.4 % ) . The difference in total antimicrobial use per 1000 resident days between intervention and usual care groups was not significantly different ( 3.52 v 3.93 ; weighted mean difference - 0.37 , - 1.17 to 0.44 ) . No significant difference was found in admissions to hospital or mortality between the study arms . A multifaceted intervention using algorithms can reduce the number of antimicrobial prescriptions for suspected urinary tract infections in residents of nursing homes .