Economic evaluation of a general practitioner with special interests led dermatology service in primary care . To carry out an economic evaluation of a general practitioner with special interest service for non - urgent skin problems compared with hospital outpatient care . Cost effectiveness analysis and cost consequences analysis alongside a randomised controlled trial . General practitioner with special interest dermatology service covering 29 general practices in Bristol . Adults referred to a hospital dermatology clinic who were potentially suitable for management by a general practitioner with special interest . Participants were randomised 2 : 1 to receive either care by general practitioner with special interest service or usual hospital outpatient care . Costs to NHS , patients , and companions , and costs of lost production . Cost effectiveness , using the 2 primary outcomes of dermatology life quality index scores and improved patient perceived access , was assessed by incremental cost effectiveness ratios and cost effectiveness acceptability curves . Cost consequences are presented in relation to all costs and both primary and secondary outcomes from the trial . Costs to the NHS for patients attending the general practitioner with special interest service were 208 pounds sterling ( 361 dollars ; 308 euro ) compared with 118 pounds sterling for hospital outpatient care . Based on analysis with imputation of missing data , costs to patients and companions were 48 pounds sterling and 51 pounds sterling , respectively ; costs of lost production were 27 pounds sterling and 34 pounds sterling , respectively . The incremental cost effectiveness ratios for general practitioner with special interest care over outpatient care were 540 pounds sterling per 1 point gain in the dermatology life quality index and 66 pounds sterling per 10 point change in the access scale . The general practitioner with special interest service for dermatology is more costly than hospital outpatient care , but this additional cost needs to be weighed against improved access and broadly similar health outcomes .