Evaluation of a general practitioner with special interest service for dermatology : randomised controlled trial . To assess the effectiveness , accessibility , and acceptability of a general practitioner with special interest service for skin problems compared with a hospital dermatology clinic . Randomised controlled trial . General practitioner with special interest dermatology service and hospital dermatology clinic . Adults referred to a hospital dermatology clinic and assessed by a consultant or the general practitioner with special interest service , . Suitable patients had non - urgent skin problems and had been identified from the referral letter as suitable for management by a general practitioner with special interest . Participants were randomised in 2 : 1 ratio to receive management by a general practitioner with special interest or usual hospital outpatient care . Primary outcomes were disease related quality of life ( dermatology life quality index ) and improvement in patients ' perception of access to services , assessed 9 months after randomisation . Secondary outcomes were patient satisfaction , preference for site of care , proportion of failed appointments , and waiting times to first appointment . 49 % of the participants were judged suitable for care by the general practitioner with special interest service . Of 768 patients eligible , 556 ( 72.4 % ) were randomised ( 354 to general practitioner with special interest , 202 to hospital outpatient care ) . After 9 months , 422 ( 76 % ) were followed up . No noticeable differences were found between the groups in clinical outcome ( median dermatology life quality index score = 1 both arms , ratio of geometric means 0.99 , 95 % confidence interval 0.85 to 1.15 ) . The general practitioner with special interest service was more accessible ( difference between means on access scale 14 , 11 to 19 ) and waited a mean of 40 ( 35 to 46 ) days less . Patients expressed slightly greater satisfaction with consultations with a general practitioner with special interest ( difference in mean satisfaction score 4 , 1 to 7 ) , and at baseline and after 9 months 61 % said they preferred care at the service . The general practitioner with special interest service for dermatology was more accessible and preferred by patients than hospital outpatient care , achieving similar clinical outcomes . Trial registration ISRCTN31962758 .