Effective control of dengue vectors with curtains and water container covers treated with insecticide in Mexico and Venezuela : cluster randomised trials . To measure the impact on the dengue vector population ( Aedes aegypti ) and disease transmission of window curtains and water container covers treated with insecticide . Cluster randomised controlled trial based on entomological surveys and , for Trujillo only , serological survey . In addition , each site had a non - randomised external control . 18 urban sectors in Veracruz ( Mexico ) and 18 in Trujillo ( Venezuela ) . 4743 inhabitants ( 1095 houses ) in Veracruz and 5306 inhabitants ( 1122 houses ) in Trujillo . Sectors were paired according to entomological indices , and 1 sector in each pair was randomly allocated to receive treatment . In Veracruz , the intervention comprised curtains treated with lambdacyhalothrin and water treatment with pyriproxyfen chips ( an insect growth regulation ) . In Trujillo , the intervention comprised curtains treated with longlasting deltamethrin ( PermaNet ) plus water jar covers of the same material . Follow - up surveys were conducted at intervals , with the final survey after 12 months in Veracruz and 9 months in Trujillo . Reduction in entomological indices , specifically the Breteau and house indices . In both study sites , indices at the end of the trial were significantly lower than those at baseline , though with no significant differences between control and intervention arms . The mean Breteau index dropped from 60 % ( intervention clusters ) and 113 % ( control ) to 7 % ( intervention ) and 12 % ( control ) in Veracruz and from 38 % to 11 % ( intervention ) and from 34 % to 17 % ( control ) in Trujillo . The pupae per person and container indices showed similar patterns . In contrast , in nearby communities not in the trial the entomological indices followed the rainfall pattern . The intervention reduced mosquito populations in neighbouring control clusters ( spill -over effect ) ; and houses closer to treated houses were less likely to have infestations than those further away . This created a community effect whereby mosquito numbers were reduced throughout the study site . The observed effects were probably associated with the use of materials treated with insecticide at both sites because in Veracruz , people did not accept and use the pyriproxyfen chips . Window curtains and domestic water container covers treated with insecticide can reduce densities of dengue vectors to low levels and potentially affect dengue transmission .