Effect of off - pump coronary artery bypass surgery on clinical , angiographic , neurocognitive , and quality of life outcomes : randomised controlled trial . To compare the clinical , angiographic , neurocognitive , and quality of life outcomes of off - pump coronary artery bypass surgery with conventional coronary artery bypass grafting surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass . Randomised controlled clinical trial . Tertiary cardiothoracic centre in Middlesex , England . 168 patients ( 27 women ) requiring primary isolated coronary artery bypass grafting surgery . Patients were randomised to conventional coronary artery bypass grafting surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass ( n = 84 ) or off - pump coronary artery bypass surgery ( n = 84 ) , carried out by 1 surgeon . Angiographic examination was carried out at 3 months postoperatively . Neurocognitive tests were carried out at baseline and at 6 weeks and 6 months postoperatively . Clinical outcome , graft patency at 3 months , neurocognitive function at 6 weeks and 6 months , and health related quality of life . Graft patency was evaluated by angiography in 151 ( 89.9 % ) patients and was similar between the cardiopulmonary bypass and off - pump groups ( risk difference - 1 % , 95 % confidence interval - 5 % to 4 % ) , with the off - pump group considered the treatment group . Patients in the off - pump group required fewer blood transfusions ( 1.7 units v 1.0 unit , P = 0.02 ) , shorter duration of mechanical ventilation ( 7.7 hours v 3.9 hours , P = 0.03 ) , and shorter hospital stay ( 10.8 days v 8.9 days ) . Scores for neurocognitive function showed a significant difference in 3 memory subtests at 6 weeks and 2 memory subtests at 6 months in favour of the off - pump group . Patients who underwent off - pump coronary artery bypass surgery showed similar patency of grafts , better clinical outcome , shorter hospital stay , and better neurocognitive function than patients who underwent conventional coronary artery bypass grafting surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass .