Outcomes of endoscopic surgery compared with open surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome among employed patients : randomised controlled trial . To compare endoscopic and open carpal tunnel release surgery among employed patients with carpal tunnel syndrome . Randomised controlled trial at a single orthopaedic department . 128 employed patients aged 25-60 years with clinically diagnosed and electrophysiologically confirmed idiopathic carpal tunnel syndrome . The primary outcome was severity of postoperative pain in the scar or proximal palm and the degree to which pain or tenderness limits activities , each rated on a 4 point scale , transformed into a combined score of 0 ( none ) to 100 ( severe pain or tenderness causing severe activity limitation ) . The secondary outcomes were length of postoperative work absence , severity of symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome and functional status scores , SF-12 quality of life score , and hand sensation and strength ( blinded examiner ) ; follow - up at 3 and 6 weeks and 3 and 12 months . 63 patients were allocated to endoscopic surgery and 65 patients to open surgery , with no withdrawals or dropouts . Pain in the scar or proximal palm was less prevalent or severe after endoscopic surgery than after open surgery but the differences were generally small . At 3 months , pain in the scar or palm was reported by 33 patients ( 52 % ) in the endoscopic group and 53 patients ( 82 % ) in the open group ( number needed to treat 3.4 , 95 % confidence interval 2.3 to 7.7 ) and the mean score difference for severity of pain in scar or palm and limitation of activity was 13.3 ( 5.3 to 21.3 ) . No differences between the groups were found in the other outcomes . The median length of work absence after surgery was 28 days in both groups . Quality of life measures improved substantially . In carpal tunnel syndrome , endoscopic surgery was associated with less postoperative pain than open surgery , but the small size of the benefit and similarity in other outcomes make its cost effectiveness uncertain .