A cost effectiveness analysis within a randomised controlled trial of post - acute care of older people in a community hospital . To assess the cost effectiveness of post - acute care for older people in a locality based community hospital compared with a department for care of elderly people in a district general hospital , which admits patients aged over 76 years with acute medical conditions . Cost effectiveness analysis within a randomised controlled trial . Community hospital and district general hospital in Yorkshire , England . 220 patients needing rehabilitation after an acute illness for which they required admission to hospital . Multidisciplinary care in the district general hospital or prompt transfer to the community hospital . EuroQol EQ-5D scores transformed into quality adjusted life years ( QALYs ) , and health and social service costs over 6 months from randomisation . The mean QALY score for the community hospital group was marginally non - significantly higher than that for the district general hospital group ( 0.38 v 0.35 ) at 6 months after recruitment . The mean ( standard deviation ) costs per patient of the health and social services resources used were similar for both groups : community hospital group 7233 pounds sterling ( euros 10,567 ; 13,341 dollars ) ( 5031 pounds sterling ) , district general hospital group 7351 pounds sterling( 6229 pounds sterling ) , and these findings were robust to several sensitivity analyses . The incremental cost effectiveness ratio for community hospital care dominated . A cost effectiveness acceptability curve , based on bootstrapped simulations , suggests that at a willingness to pay threshold of 10,000 pounds sterling per QALY , 51 % of community hospital cases will be cost effective , which rises to 53 % of cases when the threshold is 30,000 pounds sterling per QALY . Post - acute care for older people in a locality based community hospital is of similar cost effectiveness to that of an elderly care department in a district general hospital .