Effect of needle size on immunogenicity and reactogenicity of vaccines in infants : randomised controlled trial . To assess the immunogenicity of vaccines for infants and to investigate whether the incidence of reactogenicity is reduced after each immunisation dose using needles of varying lengths and gauges . Randomised controlled trial . 18 general practices within 2 UK primary care trusts . 696 healthy infants vaccinated at 2 , 3 , and 4 months of age , with follow - up to 5 months of age . Combined diphtheria , tetanus , whole cell pertussis , and Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine and a serogroup C meningococcal glycoconjugate vaccine administered using either a wide , long needle ( 23 gauge / 0.6 mm diameter , 25 mm ) , a narrow , short needle ( 25 gauge / 0.5 mm diameter , 16 mm ) , or a narrow , long needle ( 25 gauge , 25 mm ) . Local and general reactions recorded by parents for 3 days after each dose ; and diphtheria , tetanus , and H influenzae type b antibody concentrations and functional antibody against serogroup C Neisseria meningitidis 28-42 days after the third dose . Local reactions to diphtheria , tetanus , whole cell pertussis , H influenzae type b vaccinations decreased significantly with wide , long needles compared with narrow , short needles . At all 3 doses 1 less infant experienced local reactions at days 1 , 2 , or 3 for every 6 to 8 vaccinated . Significantly fewer infants vaccinated with the long needle experienced severe local reactions . Non - inferiority of the immune response was shown using a wide , long needle rather than a narrow , short needle for serogroup C meningococcal glycoconjugate vaccine and for diphtheria but not for H influenzae type b or tetanus , although no evidence was found of a decrease . Little difference was found between needles of the same length but different gauges in local reaction or immune response . Long ( 25 mm ) needles for infant immunisations can significantly reduce vaccine reactogenicity at each dose while achieving comparable immunogenicity to that of short ( 16 mm ) needles . Trial registration Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN62032215 [ controlled - trials .com ] .