Joint crisis plans for people with psychosis : economic evaluation of a randomised controlled trial . To investigate the cost effectiveness of joint crisis plans , a form of advance agreement for people with severe mental illness . Single blind randomised controlled trial . 8 community mental health teams in southern England . 160 people with a diagnosis of psychotic illness or non - psychotic bipolar disorder who had been admitted to hospital at least once within the previous 2 years . Joint crisis plan formulated by the patient , care coordinator , psychiatrist , and project worker containing contact information , details of illnesses , treatments , relapse indicators , and advance statements of preferences for care for future relapses . Control group was standardised service information . Admission to hospital ; service use over 15 months . Use of a joint crisis plan was associated with less service use and lower costs on average than in the standardised service information group , but differences were not significant . Total costs during follow - up were 7264 pounds sterling ( 10, 616 euros , 13,560 dollars ) for each participant with a joint crisis plan and 8359 pounds sterling ( 12,217 euros , 15,609 dollars ) for each participant with standardised service information ( mean difference 1095 pounds sterling ; 95 % confidence interval - 2814 to 5004 ) . Cost effectiveness acceptability curves , used to explore uncertainty in estimates of costs and effects , suggest there is a greater than 78 % probability that joint crisis plans are more cost effective than standardised service information in reducing the proportion of patients admitted to hospital . Joint crisis plans produced a non - significant decrease in admissions and total costs . Though the cost estimates had wide confidence intervals , the associated uncertainty suggests there is a relatively high probability of the plans being more cost effective than standardised service information for people with psychotic disorders .